---
layout: post
title: Dan Held is a big giant dummy head
---

**1/ Satoshi’s Vision™ is a silly endeavor, as it doesn’t matter what it was, we are where we are now. However, those pushing the “Bitcoin was first made for payments” narrative insist on cherry-picking sentences from the white paper and forum posts to champion their perspective.**

Accurate history of events an ideas is only silly to people who have an interest in being innaccurate. I'm glad you mentioned
"cherry-picking" because I'm have a lot to say about that.

**2/ The following tweetstorm is a categorical repudiation of this tired narrative. Bitcoin was purpose-built to first be a Store of Value (SoV), a thread:**

Only if you are a dunderhead or a liar.

**3/ How do we determine Satoshi’s intention? We need to look at his ideology, description of functionality/architecture, timing, and audience. Let's start with how Satoshi describes the problem Bitcoin solves. In his first public comms after the whitepaper, in the first paragraph:**

This is probably the only correct thing you're going to say in this entire thread.

**4/ “The root problem with conventional currency is all the trust that's required to make it work. The central bank must be trusted not to debase the currency, but the history of fiat currencies is full of breaches of that trust.” - Satoshi **

You don't get to complain about cherry-picking when you don't include the full quote, Danny. Satoshi goes on to say *"Their massive overhead costs make micropayments impossible."*

**5/ He later expands on that Libertarian thought in his other writings: “[with Bitcoin] we can win a major battle in the arms race and gain a new territory of freedom for several years.” — Satoshi Nakamoto**

We don't know what Satoshi's politics were. Wei Dai, who was cited in the whitepaper (we'll get to that), said this: "I'm not sure Satoshi would even consider himself a crypto-anarchist." Satoshi almost never discusses politics or government. In one case, he complained about activists from WikiLeaks using Bitcoin and said Bitcoin DOES NOT exist outside grasp of governments. 

Read the Cypherpunk Mailing List archives then compare them to Satoshi. There's no comparison. Timothy C. May signed many of his emails with instructions for making pipe bombs and said he hoped a suitcase nuke would be dropped in Washington D.C. 

As Mike Hearn wrote, "the introduction to Satoshi's paper is not a political manifesto, it talks about the problems of accepting credit card payments online. To the extent that he cared about politics he was interested in the power of the banks and inflationary policies."

**6/ How does Satoshi describe Bitcoin? His forum posts provide insight through his consistent gold/metal analogy: “Bitcoin [is] more like a collectible or commodity.” - Satoshi**

He doesn't say anything about gold or metal here. He's responding to the claim that Bitcoin is like a stock. He's merely noting that it doesn't pay dividends now or in the future. 

And the gold analogy is just silly. It wouldn't mean that Bitcoin was designed only for larger payments. Satoshi has no problem using the term "gold" in refernece to micropayents: "Interestingly, one of the e-gold systems already has a form of spam called "dusting".  Spammers send a tiny amount of gold dust in order to put a spam message in the transaction's comment field."

**7/ "In this sense, it's more typical of a precious metal. Instead of the supply changing to keep the value the same, the supply is predetermined and the value changes. As the number of users grows, the value per coin increases” - Satoshi**

You need to stop cherry-picking quotes and look at the full context. When Satoshi discusses gold, he talks about it as a medium of exchange, which it was for thousands of years. "Gold mining is a waste, but that waste is far less than the utility of having gold available as a medium of exchange. I think the case will be the same for Bitcoin. The utility of the exchanges made possible by Bitcoin will far exceed the cost of electricity used."

Here is the rest of the quote in question that you left out:  "indeed there is nobody to act as central bank or federal reserve to adjust the money supply as the population of users grows. That would have required a trusted party to determine the value, because I don't know a way for software to know the real world value of things. If there was some clever way, or if we wanted to trust someone to actively manage the money supply to peg it to something, the rules could have been programmed for that. In this sense, it's more typical of a precious metal. Instead of the supply changing to keep the value the same, the supply is predetermined and the value changes. As the number of users grows, the value per coin increases. It has the potential for a positive feedback loop; as users increase, the value goes up, which could attract more users to take advantage of the increasing value."

The comparison to gold is incidental to the design. Satoshi fixed the supply of the money because there was no other way he could think of to solve the problem he was working on without trust. It's also worth pointing out that it's not quite clear if Satoshi understood the value potential of Bitcoin when he first launched it. It seems possible he only fully considered this after people told him. "Hal sort of alluded to the possibility that it could be seen as a long-odds investment."

**8/ “As a thought experiment, imagine there was a base metal as scarce as gold but with the following properties: [not useful/no utility]. And one special, magical property: can be transported over a communications channel” - Satoshi**

Sigh. This is starting to get boring Dan. You *really* need to stop cherry-picking. The entire quote includes: "If it somehow acquired any value at all for whatever reason, then anyone wanting to transfer wealth over a long distance could buy some, transmit it, and have the recipient sell it. Maybe it could get an initial value circularly as you’ve suggested, by people foreseeing its potential usefulness for exchange. (I would definitely want some) Maybe collectors, any random reason could spark it."

Satoshi here literally says the reason Bitcoin might gain value is because people see its usefulness as a medium of exchange in comparison to other existing media of exchange. 

**9/ “If there were nothing in the world with intrinsic value that could be used as money, only scarce but no intrinsic value, I think people would still take up something. (I'm using the word scarce here to only mean limited potential supply)” - Satoshi**

You. Need. To. Include. The. Full. Fucking. Quote. Dan. You. Dunderhead.

"I think the traditional qualifications for money were written with the assumption that there are so many competing objects in the world that are scarce, an object with the automatic bootstrap of intrinsic value will surely win out over those without intrinsic value. But if there were nothing in the world with intrinsic value that could be used as money, only scarce but no intrinsic value, I think people would still take up something."

Satoshi says the opposite of what you think he says. The sentence you cite is a theoertical example for a world without anything that has properties that make it useful to human ends. In that case, he says, something scarce would still have value. But!!!!! And this is a bigggggggggg BUT! As Satoshi says, in a world with scarcity "an object with the automatic bootstrap of intrinsic value will surely win out over those without intrinsic value."

Intrinsic value is a bad term. Let's be charitable and just assume what Satoshi means is something that has properties that a human will find useful. He means that a Bitcoin that is scarce, and has useful properties, will surely win out over a Bitcoin that is just scarce.

**10/ “It might make sense just to get some in case it catches on. If enough people think the same way, that becomes a self fulfilling prophecy.” - Satoshi. Satoshi here clearly highlights that Bitcoin’s scarcity gives it value… as a SoV. Limited supply is meaningless for VISA**

He literally compares Bitcoin to VISA though earlier in another post, and in the VERY. NEXT. SENTENCE. of the post you cherry-picked, he and describes the process by which he thinks Bitcoin will catch on...

"Once it gets bootstrapped, there are so many applications if you could effortlessly pay a few cents to a website as easily as dropping coins in a vending machine."

"...Visa processed 37 billion transactions in FY2008, or an average of 100 million transactions per day. That many transactions would take 100GB of bandwidth, or the size of 12 DVD or 2 HD quality movies, or about $18 worth of bandwidth at current prices."


