---
layout: default
---

# Rose (Paul Town)

This book by Paul Town (PT) was odd to me because I don’t even know how I found it. I also didn’t know who the author was or what the book would be about when I bought it, and the reviews of it and his other books were more Internet meme speak than actual review.

> Before this book, things were different. Now I make million dollars deals and eat at the finest restaurants evrynight, thanks PT.

> Nicolas Cage delivers a truly entertaining compilation of short essays, going from the health benefits of gotu kola consuption to the optimization of your Tinder Gold account, between a wild variety of topics. Highly recommended.”

> When people say there are no great female authors in the 21st century, hand them this book. What starts out as a typical Bildungsroman evolves into an atypical Bildungsroman. What starts out as a late 19th century love story evolves into an early 20th century love story. And all of that's accomplished just with the book's cover. Imagine the delights that would ensue if I actually got up the nerve to buy and read the book!”

Googling didn’t help me figure things out. There wasn’t a ton about Paul Town but I did watch an interview of him and he seems kind hearted, intelligent, interesting, probably insane or at least playing the part of an insane person, and refreshingly honest about some of challenges he’s faced in his life.

I bought it because I can’t resist obscure, self-published or underground fiction. When it arrived, I read it. It’s terrible in a lot of ways you might expect, but there are some intelligent, haunting parts that sit with you.

The plot is basically this: two mediocre parents of a special needs child who have gotten through the last thirteen years of under-appreciating the gift she is to them by drinking, feeling sorry for themselves, or lying to each other. They end up being responsible for their daughter’s tragic death after they let her play outside alone (she asked them to come and they were too tired/selfish) and she is struck by a car. The book follows them as they go through the process of arranging the funeral, suing the driver of the car for damages, benefiting from the death of their daughter while trying to bury their guilt for doing so, and leads up to an…odd ending.

The writing is mostly amateurish. There is no dialogue. None. There are awkward ways of phrasing things like reminding us that people have a tendency to unload their bags when they get home from vacation (obviously). There are funny typos like “higher” in place of “hire,” or overuse of the word “quite” as a description back to back. The characters are less characters than archetypes. It doesn’t really live up to its claim of being “disturbing,” and his descriptions of the parents in the story as “demons” doesn’t match their thoughts and actions—they’re more like mediocre second-handers, lazier Peter Keating types. There is a kind of evil in that, but not of the kind that inspires descriptions like “demon” or “monster.” 

Then there’s the ending. The book ends suddenly, supernaturally—which was strange because there was next to no buildup that this would be a supernatural story at all—and with a barely dressed up depressive philosophical statement by the author, jarringly addressed to the readers, which sometimes I’m partial to—see Atlas Shrugged, The Fountainhead, The Christmas Carol, or the Dream of the Ridiculous Man, but which in this case felt shallow, forced, and containing the anger of an intelligent person in their early twenties who does not quite have enough experience to temper their anger with empathy and charity. 

The author also seemed confused about the issues he was writing about. While he has obvious potential as a writer and intelligence in how he writes about the spectacle of ostentatious grief and shallow, emotional and financial grifting that often takes place after the tragic death of a loved one—in this case, the death of the two characters’ special needs child—I think he under-appreciates the conflicting emotions involved in raising a special needs child and directs too much anger and judgement towards the characters for their failures to be good parents to her in life and death, and too much blame in her tragic death in the beginning of the novel. 

Experience with parents with children with severe special needs has taught me that even the best of parents struggle with demons about their child. Hell, even parents of children without special needs struggle with those. This is not to say that the parents in the story should not have been more for their daughter, only that a bit more understanding from the author or narrator, especially during the odd philosophical outburst at the end, would have done good for the book. It’s almost like he needs a good mental sparring partner to help him refine his points. 

Still, it was an interesting read and I actually wanted to know what was going to happen to our characters, which is the most important part of a good book and more that can be said for most books. I’m not sure the ending makes any sense, or that much of the commentary he makes about it is correct—he also speaks directly to the reader and awkwardly chastises us for thinking something about the characters that, at least I myself, was certainly not thinking—but Town struck a chord with me the scenes of what I have already described as death grifting, as well as some of his descriptions of the psychological evasion which is so common and which we are all guilty of to some degree. The father’s realization that he had thirteen years to be a good dad to his daughter and would *never* have another moment to correct course, also hit me hard as a father myself. 

These are some passages of the funeral that I enjoyed.

> It had a sort of perverse and profane air, more like some strange festival or circus than a quiet and honest lying to rest that it would have been if profit had not been in the mind of the lawyer, Adam and Eve. People who didn’t even know Rose and wouldn’t be able to pick her race out of a lineup a few days later showed up to pay their respects. Absent relatives and distant friends made speeches and broke down in tears. Everyone consoled Adam and Eve like they were the ones who suffered most, like they were the ones who had been killed.”

> Adam and Eve found the whole affair quite disorienting. Never before had they experienced such a degree of attention from strangers. This was a sad time, their daughter was dead and the memory of her blood pooling in the street was still fresh in their minds, but it was also a time where they felt like they mattered, like their non-notable existence mattered.”

> The funeral and its obscene fanfare went off without a hitch. The media loved it, the participants loved it, the lawyer loved it, and both Adam and Eve came away from it looking like saints who had been wronged in a way that could not ever be righted. As soon as the funeral was over, it took backseat to the legal proceedings. The wise as a servant but perhaps not as innocent as a dove lawyer used this to apply leverage on the driver of the car, and what a perverse amount of leverage it was. What defense could be mounted to make the murderer of a special little girl seem innocent?”

Despite the flaws, there is the beginning of a good book here if the author had an editor and spent much longer working on it. Narcissistic, shallow parents, haunted by the ghost of their daughter who died through their laziness and negligence, trying to evade psychological and moral responsibility for their failures would make for an interesting, terrifying story and Town has several psychologically penetrating things worth saying. Unfortunately it suffers like many self-published novels from feeling more like an outline than a polished book.

I respect that fact the he published it, and has published so many other books, and he should keep writing. I’m not going to be recommending it, but I also wouldn’t tell someone “that’s the worst book I’ve ever read!” And I’ll check in on Paul’s writing from time to time to see if he does anything knew. I’ll probably buy his other books just because.



